.TH CLAIRE 7
.SH NAME
claire \- a high-level functional and object-oriented language with rule
processing capabilities
.SH DESCRIPTION
Visible slots in CLAIRE.
.PP
.B active? (Compile)

compiler.active? \[->] boolean

This boolean is set to true when the compiler is active (i.e., compiling CLAIRE
code into C++ code). This is useful to introduce variants between the compiled
and interpreted code (such as different sizes). Note that there is another
flag, loading?, to see if a file is loaded by the compiler.
.PP
.B arg1 / arg2 (Kernel)

arg1(x:Interval) \[->] any
.br
arg2(x:Interval) \[->] any

These slots contain respectively the minimal and maximal element of a CLAIRE
interval.
.PP
.B descendents (Core)

descendents(x:class) \[->] set[class]

For a class c, c.\fIdescendents\fR is the set all classes that are under c in
the hierarchy (transitive closure of the subclass relation).
.PP
.B domain (Core)

domain(r:restriction) \[->] list
.br
domain(r:relation) \[->] any

A restriction is either a slot or a method. If r is a slot, domain(r) is the
class on which r is defined. If r is a method, r.\fIdomain\fR is the list
formed by the types of the parameters required by the method. For a relation r,
r.\fIdomain\fR is the type on which r is defined.
.PP
.B formula (Core)

formula(m:method) \[->] lambda
.br
formula(d:demon) \[->] lambda

\fIformula\fR gives the formula associated with the method/demon.
.PP
.B funcall (Core)

funcall(m:method, x:any) \[->] any
.br
funcall(m:method, x:any, y:any) \[->] any
.br
funcall(m:method, x:any, y:any, z:any) \[->] any
.br
funcall(f:function, x:any, cx:class, crange:class) \[->] any
.br
funcall(f:function, x:any, cx:class, y:any, cy:class, crange:class) \[->] any
.br
funcall(f:function, x:any, y:any, cy:class, z:any, cz:class, crange:class)
\[->] any

\fIfuncall\fR provide an easy interface with external (C++) functions.
\fIfuncall\fR(f,s1,x,s) applies an external function to an argument of sort s1.
The sort of the returned value must be passed as an argument (cf. Appendix C).
\fIfuncall\fR(f,s1,x,s2,y,s) is the equivalent method in the two-arguments
case, and \fIfuncall\fR(f,s1,x,s2,y,s3,y, s) is the equivalent method in the
three-arguments case. Notice that the LAST argument is the sort of the result,
and that giving an erroneous sort argument will likely produce a fatal error.

\fIfuncall\fR also applies a method or a lambda to one or two arguments.

Last, \fIfuncall\fR may be applied directly to a \fBfunction\fR, that is a
primitive entity that represents a C++ function. This method is provided for
expert users, since it is a system method that requires the type of each
arguments (cx,cy, ...) and the type of the return value (crange), which must be
provided as classes. Failure to provide the proper sort (i.e., this type
information that is usually found in the \fIsrange\fR slot of the method) will
provoke a system failure.
.PP
.B imports (Kernel)

imports(m:module) \[->] map_set

imports(m) is a map that helps to add specific library for each file of the
module.
.PP
.B instances (Kernel)

instances(c:class) \[->] type[set[c]]

returns the set of all instances of c, created up to now (if c has not been
declared ephemeral).
.PP
.B inverse (Kernel)

inverse(r:relation) \[->] relation

r.\fIinverse\fR contains the inverse relation of r. If the range of r inherits
from bag then r is considered multi-valued by default (cf. Section 4.5). If r
and its inverse are mono-valued then if r(x) = y then inverse(r)(y) = x. If
they are multi-valued, then inverse(r)(y) returns the set (resp. list) of all x
such that (y % r(x)).
.PP
.B isa (Core)

isa(x:object) \[->] class

returns the class of which x is an instance.
.PP
.B loading? (Compile)

compiler.loading? \[->] boolean

This boolean is set to true when the compiler is loading a file before
compiling it. This is useful to introduce variants between the compiled and
interpreted code (see also the \fIactive\fR? flag)
.PP
.B made_of (Kernel)

made_of(m:module) \[->] list[string]

m.\fImade_of\fR contains the list of files that contain the code of the module.
.PP
.B open (Core)

open(c:class) \[->] integer
.br
open(r:relation) \[->] integer

x.\fIopen\fR is a slot that tells the extensibility level of the class or
relation x.

For a class, there are 6 values: -1 (system.close) means that the class cannot
be extended neither with instances nor subclasses; 0 (abstract) means that the
class cannot have any instances; 1 (final) means that no new subclasses could
be created; 2 (default) is the default status, 3 (system.open) means that the
class is explicitly casted as extensible; 4 (ephemeral) says that the class is
a subset of ephemeral_object (the list of instances is not maintained). Section
2.2 shows how to define the open status of a class using the proper
declarations.

For a relation: open = 1 means that some of the restrictions have been
compiled, hence no conflicting new restriction definition is allowed (cf.
section 4.1 : extensibility status = closed); open = 2 means undefined; open =
3 means that the extensibility status is "open", that new restriction may be
defined or re-defined at any time.
.PP
.B parts, part_of (Kernel)

parts(m:module) \[->] list
.br
part_of(m:module) \[->] module

m.part_of contains the module to which m belongs. parts is the inverse of
part_of : parts(m) is the set of submodules of m (in the module hierarchy).
.PP
.B vars (Kernel)

system.vars \[->] list[string]

system.\fIvars\fR contains the list of arguments passed on the shell command
line (list of strings).
.PP
.B verbose (Kernel)

system.verbose \[->] integer

\fIverbose\fR(system) (also \fIverbose\fR() ) is the verbosity level that can
be changed. Note that trace(i:integer) sets this slot to i.
.PP
.B version (Kernel)

system.version \[->] float
.br
compiler.version \[->] float

the version if a float number (<version>.<revision>) that is part of the
release number.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Yves Caseau and François Laburthe.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 1994-2023, Yves Caseau. All rights reserved.
.SH SEE ALSO
CLAIRE(3)
.PP
Full documentation <https://sites.google.com/view/claire4/home>
